Multi-access key to the Mosses of Victoria
##Introduction
The multi-access key to the Mosses of Victoria is a key to all 419 Moss taxa that are known to occur in Victoria, both native and introduced. This is the first ever publicly available multi-access format key for a regional moss flora. It contains 60 characters to help distinguish taxa from each other with, including place of occurrence and several morphological features both vegetative and reproductive. It differs from other (dichotomous) keys provided in VicFlora by giving the user the flexibility to choose from one of the 60 characters provided rather than the user having to commit to investigate the particular features being questioned in the dichotomous keys. This has the benefit of:
1.	avoiding having to answer questions relating to a feature that may not be present in the sample when being identified, 
2.	potentially being able to identify a taxon without needing to comprehend the most technical terminology and
3.	allowing the rapid identification of taxa with distinct features rarely encountered among the mosses
To use the key the user selects a feature from the features in the top left Features Available panel and clicks on the state present in their specimen to be identified. Once selected this feature and state will show as being selected in the Features Chosen panel directly below the Features Available panel. To undo a selection, click on the box next to the state chosen in the Features Chosen panel to erase the tick in the box. Once a feature state is chosen all the taxa that do not possess the chosen feature state are discarded in the bottom right Entities Discarded panel and those that do possess the chosen feature state are retained in the top right Entities Remaining panel. The user continues to choose further character states present in their specimen until identification is achieved. To restart the key when finished select the restart key icon represented by the two green arrows in the top left corner of the screen.
General helpful hints
For the most effective use of this key the user is encouraged to read the help guides for each character and state before submitting an answer for that character and state. Help guides and photographs can be found by clicking on the page icons beside characters and states. This help will reduce the chance of misinterpretation of the character and state. Some information and definitions required for interpreting a state may be given under character so users are encouraged to read the help guide for the characters before the states. When taking measurements or assessing which state a character exists in for the taxon being identified a typical plant and plant part should be used. Typical is here interpreted as a close representation of the average plant in terms of size and stature in a population and a plant part that represents the average condition for that character (e.g. average length, the most frequently observed shape etc.). The only exception to this is for the character ‘stem length’ in which the larger stems should be chosen to remove the possibility of using immature material. For some of the characters it is possible for some taxa to possess more than one character state for the character. In such cases either correct character state can be chosen. 
Both relatively straightforward and technical characters that require more expertise and access to compound microscopes are provided. Characters are grouped together in subjects, mostly based on the plant parts that they relate to. For each plant part, characters that can be assessed without a compound microscope are provided first followed by those that require a compound microscope. These latter characters are indicated with an asterisk. The least technical of the characters that don’t require a compound microscope are provided first for each plant part. These are often able to be determined without any visual aids. Characters that don’t require a compound microscope become increasingly more technical working down to the characters requiring a compound microscope (for plant parts where characters that require a compound microscope are provided). Similarly, among the characters that require a compound microscope, those that are least technical or prone to misinterpretation are provided first and become increasingly more technical working down toward the next plant part’s set of characters. Novices in moss identification are advised to begin with the first characters provided for each plant part or subject first before moving into the more technically demanding characters for each plant part.
To help identify the specimen to be identified as quickly as possible the best option can be used. This option highlights which characters should be used first to discard the maximum number of taxa among the remaining taxa. To use the best option select the best icon given as a blue wand at the top of the screen. For some very similar species and varieties narrowing down to a single species may not be possible using this multiaccess key alone. In such instances the user can also use the dichotomous keys, descriptions and photographs provided to help distinguish between the remaining similar species.
Stem
Six characters that refers to the main axis of the plant bearing the leaves.
Stem length
This character refers to how long the main stem of the leaf bearing plant (gametophyte) is from where it first emerges from the ground to its tip in mature gametophytes. In leaves with hairpoints the length does not include the hairpoint. Immature plants may fall within a smaller state than what they would when they are reproductively mature with capsules. To avoid misidentification using this character it is best to use this character when identifying plants with capsules or choose a large stem rather than an average size stem. 
Stem less than 5 mm
Species that fall into this state are often tiny Earth mosses that are often only noticeable after moisture when the leaves become hydrated. 
Stem 5 mm to 2 cm
This state mainly comprises average size moss species.
Stem greater than 2 cm
Species that fall into this state are the larger upright species, including species in the family Polytrichaceae, and often long-creeping pleurocarpous species.
Branching type
This character refers to how many branches come off a main stem and how such branches are arranged along a main stem and includes four states.
Simple, forked or with few branches
In this state there is a single main stem with no branches, the main stem forks once or twice or there are up to five branches coming off the main stem which themselves are not branched.
Pinnate or with several branches
In this state there is a main stem with more than five branches or forks, more or less evenly spread along the main stem and sometimes branches are themselves branched.
Dendroid with an erect stipe and highly branched frond section
In this state the main stem diverges away from the substrate, is not branched in its lower parts (the stipe), with many branches being concentrated toward the top of the plant in a frond section. This gives the impression of a miniature tree with the stipe appearing like a trunk and the frond section appearing like the branches and foliage of the tree.
Fascicles of branches at intervals along stem
In this state a main stem is highly branched with a couple to several branches bunched together (a fascicle) at intervals along a main stem. 
Indument 
This character refers to the abundance of rhizoids, which appear like hairs, on the stem away from the substrate and comprises two states.
Tomentose away from substrate
In this state the stem has a conspicuous number of rhizoids where it is not in contact with the substrate. Often these will be visible between the leaves without the need to remove leaves. Often species that fall into this category will also be glabrous near the stem apex but clearly tomentose closer toward the base. 
Glabrous or with sparse rhizoids or tomentose only where in contact with substrate
In this state the stems are completely bare of rhizoids, there are only occasional rhizoids that require close inspection to find, or have a conspicuous tuft of rhizoids only at the very base or at positions on a creeping stem where it is in contact with the substrate. All small mosses that have short stems (less than 5 mm long) will fall into this category.
Paraphyllia
This character refers to the whether there are appendages other than leaves and rhizoids that are positioned along the stem between branches and comprises two states.
Paraphyllia present
In this state there are paraphyllia which are small appendages (much smaller than leaves) that emerge from the stem between branches and look like small deformed leaves or scales.
Paraphyllia absent
In this state the stem only bears leaves or sometimes rhizoids between branches.
Number of outer layers of thin-walled inflated cells*
This character requires the user to make a cross-section through a main stem and determine the number of layers of cells toward the outside of the cross-section that are much larger than cells towards the centre. To use this character it is advisable to make a judgement based on multiple sections due to damage that is likely to occur when making sections. This character comprises six states.
0
1
2
3
4
5
Central strand*
This character requires the user to make a cross-section through a main stem and determine whether there is a zone at the centre of the stem of cells that are differently sized or differentiated from the remainder of the stem. To use this character it is advisable to make a judgement based on multiple sections due to damage that is likely to occur when making sections. This character comprises two states.
Differentiated
In this state the centre of the stem has a zone of cells that are smaller than or differentiated from the cells exterior to them towards the outside of the stem.
Not differentiated
In this state there is no clear differentiation of zones of cells near the centre of the stem.
Leaf
A set of 29 characters that refer to the main broadened photosynthetic segment of the plant.
Leaf length
This character refers to the distance from the point where the leaf is attached to the stem to the leaf tip (both stem or branch leaves). Mature plants (those that produce capsule or appear to be fully grown) should be used. Often the leaves at the base of a sporophyte (perichaetial leaves) are longer than other leaves. These leaves should be avoided. Instead focus on using leaves midway along the stem. Length is divided into five ranges.
Leaf width
This character refers to the distance across the leaf (both stem or branch leaves) at its widest point when the leaf is flattened (most accurately done under a cover slip). Focus on using leaves from mature plants, midway along their stems. Width is divided into four ranges.
Leaf shape
This character refers to the shape of the leaf (both stem or branch leaves) when flattened and includes six states.
Ovate, lanceolate or triangular
In this state the leaf is widest near the base and tapers to the apex.
Elliptic, oblong, lingulate, obovate, panduriform or spathulate 
In this state the leaf is widest near the middle or toward the apex, or has an indentation near the middle, and is clearly longer than wide.
Linear
In this state the leaf has more or less parallel sides, and is much longer than wide (length:width greater than 6:1).
Orbicular
In this state the length of the leaf is similar to its width and is circular.
Falcate
In this state the leaf is sickle-shaped, so one side of the leaf is longer than the other side. 
Subulate
In this state the leaf has a broad basal part that often sheathes the stem, which then contracts abruptly toward the apex into a very narrow apical section that often comprises mostly costa with only a few cells width of lamina on either side of the costa.
Change in form from moist to dehydrated 
This character refers to how the leaves change in response to being dehydrated. Leaves can be seen in a dehydrated state in times of the year with extended periods with no rain and lower humidity such as in summer, or in collected plants. How leaves compare when dehydrated to when hydrated can be discerned when compared to plants that are moistened or immersed in water. This character comprises five states.
Remaining spreading, hardly altered
In this state dehydrated leaves are retained at a similar position relative to the stem as what they are when fully hydrated and do not become distinctly contorted. They may come in towards the stem slightly but still remain at least erect-spreading.
Spreading to straight, erect and appressed 
In this state the dehydrated leaves come inwards towards the stem from a spreading position when hydrated and become closely pressed against the stem, pointing toward the stem apex.
Spreading or erect to contorted, distinctly incurved or crisped 
In this state the dehydrated leaves individually become contorted and form spirals but do not spiral around the stem.
Spreading to each twisted around the stem 
In this state the dehydrated leaves spiral around the stem.
Remaining erect, straight and appressed
In this state the leaves are erect and remain close to the stem regardless of whether the plant is hydrated or dry.
Arrangement
This character refers to how the leaves are presented relative to the stem.
In two rows (distichous)
In this state there is a row of leaves to one side of the stem and another row of leaves on the opposite side of the stem.
In more than two rows and spreading in same plane on both sides of stem (complanate)
In this state there is more than one row of leaves attached around the stem that adhere closely together so that they all form a flattened surface.
Spreading or facing all directions around stem
This is the most frequently encountered state and is applicable to all species that have leaves that radiate in various directions from the stem. It also includes species with more than two distinct ranks that are not complanate, such as tristichous or pentastichous species. Rosette forming species also belong to this state.
Secund
In this state all the leaves are aggregated to one side of the stem and point in the one direction.
Hairpoint
This character refers to whether there is a hair-like structure that continues beyond the apex of the leaf lamina. Often the hairpoint is a continuation of the midrib (costa) but can also be a separate structure in species without a midrib extending to the leaf apex. It does not contain laminal cells. 
Hairpoint present
In this state there is a hair-like structure that continues beyond the apex of the leaf lamina. 
Hairpoint absent
In this state the leaf apex terminates the leaf and there is not a thin hair-like point that continues beyond. Species that are piliferous (i.e. with a lamina that abruptly narrows but still comprises similar laminal cells several cells wide) are included in this state. Mucronate species are also included in this state. 
Costa
This character refers to a group of differentiated cells that form a line through the center of the leaf that may be present or not and vary in length, width and number.
Costa absent
In this state the cells in the middle of the leaf, from the base to the apex, appear similar to cells on either side of the middle leaving no discernable line through the center of the leaf.
Short and double
In this state two short, narrow and often faint lines can be discerned near the base of the leaf. In assessing this state care needs to be taken to cut leaves off at the attachment to the stem rather than tearing the leaves off. If leaves are torn off from the stem, rather than being carefully broken or cut off, the base of the leaf, including the two midveins, may remain on the stem, which would give the false impression that the sample does not have midveins.
Single terminating in lower half
In this state there is a single line of differentiated cells that can be discerned that ends before reaching half way to the leaf apex. In assessing this state care needs to be taken to cut leaves off at the attachment to the stem rather than tearing the leaves off. If leaves are torn off from the stem, rather than being carefully broken or cut off, the base of the leaf, including the single midvein, may remain on the stem, which would give the false impression that the sample does not have a midvein.
Single terminating in upper half below apex
In this state there is a single line of differentiated cells that can be discerned that ends in the upper half of the leaf but does not reach the apex. This state includes species with leaves with a subpercurrent costa (ending a few cells before the apex).
Single, narrow (to 1/3 of leaf width at base) and terminating at apex or extending beyond
In this state there is a single line that is less than a third of the width of the leaf at its base, but typically no more than a few cells wide, that extends from the base to the apex of the leaf or continues beyond the apex of the leaf.
Single, broad (greater than 1/3 leaf width at base) and terminating at apex or extending beyond
In this state there is a group of differentiated cells that runs down the center of the leaf from the base to the apex that forms a discernable line at least a third the width of the leaf at its base. In some species this line is so broad that it forms a region of cells with thickened walls, with thin-walled cells confined to near the margins. In such cases these thin-walled cells are easily missed and so only the thick-walled cells are observed giving the impression that the cells in the middle are not differentiated and the leaf is without a midrib. The family Leucobryaceae (Campylopus, Leucobryum) are characterized by this state.
Uniformity
This character refers to whether the leaves at a certain point along the stem are similar in length and shape or whether they differ significantly.
Two forms (dimorphic) present at same stem position
In this state two leaf forms are present at a certain point along the stem that may differ in length, shape or both.
All leaves similar (monomorphic) at any position on a stem
In this state all leaves at a certain point along the stem are similar in length and shape to each other.
Vaginant Lamina
This character refers to the presence or absence of a pocket formed to one side of the costa or middle of the leaf by a second layer of leaf lamina that overlays a lamina below. 
Vaginant lamina present
In this state there is a pocket formed to one side of the costa or middle of the leaf by a second layer of leaf lamina that overlays a lamina below. This state is unique to Fissidens.
Vaginant lamina absent
In this state there is no second layer of leaf lamina that overlays another lamina layer to form a pocket. This state occurs in all Victorian mosses except Fissidens.
Undulation
This character refers to whether there are distinct undulations throughout the leaf or along its margins and comprises two states.
Distinctly undulate when moist
In this state the leaf has distinct undulations that gives the appearance of water with ripples on its surface or the leaf margins are wavy.
Not distinctly undulate when moist
In this state the leaf surface is flat, concave or folded without any noticeable undulations.
Surface filaments
This character refers to whether there are filaments on the upper or adaxial (face facing the stem apex) surface of the leaf and comprises two states.
Surface filaments present
In this state chlorophyllous filaments or strings of green cells are borne on the costa or near the middle of the leaf. These occur in the genera Aloina, Crossidium and Ephermerum.
Surface filaments absent
In this state there are no filaments borne on the surfaces of the leaf. 
Border*
This character refers to whether there is a set of clearly differentiated cells (apparent in ×100 or less magnification) that forms a border along the edge of the leaf and comprises five states.
Present in basal and apical half and composed of more elongated cells, sometimes becoming intramarginal
In this state there is a border of cells (one to several rows) that follows the edge of the leaf into its apical half that are noticeably more elongated than the cells toward the middle of the leaf. 
Present in basal and apical half but not composed of more elongated cells
In this state there is a border of cells (one to several rows) that extends into its apical half that are clearly distinct from the cells toward the middle of the leaf but they are not noticeably more elongated. Instead, they are less elongate or look different because they are much less papillose or thicker walled. 
Present only in basal half and composed of more elongated cells
In this state there is a border of cells (one to several rows) that follows the edge of the leaf only in the basal half that are noticeably more elongated than the cells toward the middle of the leaf. In the apical half the margin has cells that are similar to those away from the margin when viewed through ×100 magnification. 
Present only in basal half but not composed of more elongated cells
In this state there is a border of cells (one to several rows) that follows the edge of the leaf only in the basal half that are clearly distinct from the cells toward the middle of the leaf but they are not noticeably more elongated. Instead, they are less elongate or look different because they are much less papillose or thicker walled. In the apical half the margin has cells that are similar to those away from the margin when viewed through ×100 magnification.  
Absent throughout
In this state the cells at the edge of the leaf do not differ significantly enough from cells on their interior side to form an easily discernable border when viewed through ×100 magnification. 
Cell dimension transition throughout leaf*
This character refers to how the dimensions of the laminal cells (those that make up the leaf parts other than the costa) varies throughout the leaf. It does not include any differentiated border cells.  When assessing this character care needs to be taken to cut or brake leaves off at the attachment to the stem rather than tearing the leaves off. If leaves are carelessly torn off some of the basal rows of cells may remain on the stem which is an issue for the states in which the basal cells rows differ from those elsewhere in the leaf. This character comprises ten states.
Elongate cells (length:width greater than 2:1) throughout base, with a mixture of elongate and isodiametric (length:width to 2:1) in apical half
In this state there are multiple rows of cells with length:width greater than 2:1 at its base and in the apical half of the leaf there are a large proportion of both laminal cells with length:width greater than 2:1 and laminal cells with length:width to 2:1. In this state this mixture can be more well represented by more elongate or more isodiametric cells, but both types are still represented by more than the occasional cell.
Elongate (length:width greater than 2:1) and isodiametric (length:width to 2:1) throughout leaf except at alar angles where isodiametric or oblate
In this state there are a large proportion of both laminal cells with length:width greater than 2:1 and laminal cells with length:width to 2:1 throughout the leaf except for in then basal corners where all or almost all the cells have length:width to 2:1 or are wider than long.
Elongate (length:width greater than 2:1) throughout base except sometimes isodiametric (length:width to 2:1) in alar angles, transitioning to cells isodiametric or oblate in apical half
In this state there are multiple rows of cells with length:width greater than 2:1 at its base and in the apical half all laminal cells have length:width to 2:1 or there may be the very occasional cell with length:width greater than 2:1 particularly near the costa or apex.
Elongate (length:width greater than 2:1) throughout
In this state all laminal cells have length:width greater than 2:1 or there may be the very occasional laminal cell with length:width to 2:1, particularly at the very base where attached to the stem.
Mostly elongate (length:width greater than 2:1) throughout leaf except at alar angles or in basal few rows where at least some cells isodiametric (length:width to 2:1)
In this state the leaf lamina is composed of cells with length:width greater than 2:1 except in the basal few rows or in the basal corners where there are several cells with length:width to 2:1.
Isodiametric (length:width to 2:1) or oblate throughout the leaf except sometimes elongate (length:width greater than 2:1) near insertion
In this state the leaf lamina is composed of cells with length:width to 2:1 or cells that are wider than long. There may be the occasional cell with length:width greater than 2:1 in the basal few rows or in the basal corners. 
Isodiametric (length:width to 2:1) throughout leaf except along costa or near basal centre where elongate (length:width greater than 2:1)
In this state the leaf lamina is composed of cells with length:width to 2:1 or cells that are wider than long except for most cells near the costa at the base, if a costa is present, or near the basal centre if a costa is absent, that have length:width greater than 2:1.
Mix of elongate (length:width greater than 2:1) and isodiametric (length:width to 2:1) throughout
In this state there is generally a reasonable representation of laminal cells with length:width greater than 2:1 and laminal cells with length:width to 2:1 in most parts of the leaf.
Mix of elongate (length:width greater than 2:1) and isodiametric (length:width to 2:1) throughout, except in alar regions where entirely isodiametric and along costa or basal centre where entirely elongated
In this state there is generally a reasonable representation of both laminal cells with length:width greater than 2:1 and laminal cells with length:width to 2:1 in most parts of the leaf, except in the basal corners where all or almost all cells have length:width to 2:1 and near the base along the costa or centre (when a costa is absent) where all or almost all cells have length:width greater than 2:1.
Isodiametric (length:width to 2:1) in apical half becoming oblate in alar angles and elongate (length:width greater than 2:1) near basal costa or centre
In this state all or close to all laminal cells have length:width to 2:1 in the apical half, while in the basal corners all or close to all cells are wider than long, and all or almost all cells near the base along the costa or centre (when a costa is absent) have length:width greater than 2:1.
Alar cell composition*
This character refers to the appearance of cells in the basal corners compared to the laminal cells away from the base and basal corners. When assessing this character care needs to be taken to cut leaves off at the attachment to the stem rather than tearing the leaves off. If leaves are torn off from the stem, rather than being carefully broken or cut off, the base of the leaf, including the alar cells, may remain on the stem.
Not distinct from surrounding cells
In this state the cells near the base of the leaf (alar cells) are similar and not easily distinguished from other laminal cells.
Several rows of distinctly inflated hyaline cells with thin walls
In this state there are several rows of cells in the basal corners are much wider than other cells of the leaf, have no pigmentation so appear clear, and have cell walls that appear like a thin line that often bulges outwards from the centre of the cell.
Basal row of distinctly inflated cells with supra alar cells quadrate and non-inflated
In this state there is a single most basal row of cells that are much larger than adjacent cells and have cell walls that bulge outwards from the centre of the cell. The adjoining cell row on the apical side are much smaller and square or short rectangular or nearly so and also differ in size and shape from other cells of the leaf which are usually far more elongate.
Distinctly less elongate but not inflated or multiple times wider, and in small area at angles
In this state there are a few cells in the basal angles that are less elongate than cells away from the basal angles but are not multiple times wider than such cells. They are easily overlooked because they are in a small region near the base and may be easily left behind on the stem if leaves are carelessly removed from the stem.
Distinctly less elongate but not inflated or multiple times wider, and extending far up margin
In this state there is a large region centred around the basal corners, but often extending to the costa and sometimes half way along the margin toward the apex, of cells that are distinctly less elongate than laminal cells near the middle of the leaf but are not multiple times wider.
Several rows inflated or not, and with thickened and/or coloured cell walls
In this state the cells near in the basal corners have yellow, orange, brown or red cell walls, making them differently coloured from the laminal cells with clear cell walls in the rest of the leaf and/or the cells in the basal corners have far thicker cell walls than the laminal cells in the rest of the leaf.
Margin*
This character refers to whether the edge of the leaf is toothed or not. 
Entire
In this state the edge of the leaf is a smooth line without teeth or the margin is rough due to papillae on the cell surfaces.
Denticulate or serrulate, all teeth solitary
In this state the edge of the leaf has teeth that may be sharp or blunt and may be formed by single or multiple protruding cells. These teeth may be confined to the apex of the leaf or near the base and are not clearly in pairs. Cells that are highly papillose can appear slightly crenulate, however, these interruptions to the line of the margin are not here considered teeth.
Denticulate or serrulate, some teeth paired
In this state the edge of the leaf has teeth that may be sharp or blunt and are usually formed by multiple protruding cells. These teeth may be confined to the apex and some are clearly in pairs with two teeth emerging from near the same point on the margin.
Colour of cells along centre near base*
This character refers to whether the cells near the centre of the leaf near the base apart from the costa (if present) are coloured or if they are clear or simply green from chloroplasts.
Yellow or orange
In this state the cells near the centre of the leaf near the base apart from the costa (if present) are distinctly yellow or orange.
Hyaline or not coloured 
In this state the cells near the centre of the leaf near the base apart from the costa (if present) are clear or green from chloroplasts without additional pigmentation.
Hairpoint surface*
This character refers to whether the hairpoint is rough or not.
Denticulate
In this state the hairpoint has teeth or is rough.
Smooth
In this state the hairpoint has a smooth, uninterrupted surface that appears as a straight edge.
Cell definition*
This character refers to whether most of the laminal cells in the apical half can clearly be separated from each other when viewed through ×100 magnification and comprises two states.
Cell walls obscured by papillae, multiple layers and/or numerous chloroplasts
In this state the laminal cells have dense lumps or protruberances on their surface, form several layers and/or have numerous chloroplast which makes it unclear where the edges of the cells are when looking through ×100 magnification.
Cell walls clearly discernable from cell lumens
In this state the cell walls are clearly visible and it is easy to discern one cell from another at ×100 magnification.
Cell wall thickness throughout apical half*
This character refers to how thick the line is that forms around the perimeter of each cell and comprises two states.
Thick, sometimes collenchymatous
In this state the cell wall is thick, sometimes particularly in the corners, so that it appears like a continuous region with interspersed cell lumens (cell other than the wall) scattered through it, rather than the cell wall looking like a line than follows the perimeter of the lumen.
Thin
In this state the cell wall forms a thin line around the perimeter of the cells and appears more like a cell perimeter rather than a continuous area of the leaf lamina independent of the cell lumens. Consequently, almost all the leaf lamina is occupied by lumens.
Costa spines*
This character refers to whether there are spines along the costa, especially toward the leaf apex, on the abaxial surface.
Costa spines present
In this state there are spines along the costa, especially toward the leaf apex, on the abaxial surface.
Costa spines absent
In this state there are no spines along any part of the costa.
Margin deflection*
This character refers to whether the very margin itself is a continuation of the general curve of the leaf cross-section or if it is curled in some form and comprises three states. 
Flat
In this state the leaf margin does not comprise a roll inwards toward the top (adaxial) surface of the leaf or a roll toward the bottom (abaxial) surface of the leaf. Leaves that are concave may fall in this state because it is the whole leaf that is curled rather than the margin. The margin forms part of a smooth curve with the rest of the leaf when viewed in cross-section rather than deviating from this curve.
Involute or incurved
In this state part of the margin rolls inwards toward the top or adaxial surface (side facing the stem apex) of the leaf. If part of the margin is flat and another part is inrolled, the correct selection is this state. This state can be assessed under compound microscope by placing a leaf adaxial side up under a cover slip and seeing whether there is a darker part of the edge (caused by the multiple cells thick overlap of the inrolled leaf margin) and tuning in and out using the fine tune focus to see if the edge is above the lamina below.
Revolute or recurved
In this state part of the margin rolls inwards toward the bottom or abaxial surface (side facing the stem base) of the leaf. If part of the margin is flat and another part is recurved or revolute, the correct selection is this state. This state can be assessed under compound microscope by placing a leaf abaxial side up under a cover slip and seeing whether there is a darker part of the edge (caused by the multiple cells thick overlap of the revolute or recurved leaf margin) and tuning in and out using the fine tune focus to see if the edge is above the lamina below.
Surface of laminal cells in apical half*
This character refers to the texture of the surface of the laminal cells that are in the apical half of the leaf.
Smooth or bulging
In this state the laminal cells in the apical half of the leaf do not have any bumps.
Papillose or mammilose
In this state at least some of the laminal cells in the apical half of the leaf have a single protuberance away from the cell walls. 
Prorulate
In this state at least some of the laminal cells in the apical half of the leaf have a protrusion at one end where cells walls meet.
Pluripappilose
In this state at least some of the cells in the apical half of the leaf have more than one protuberance scattered over their surface including and mostly away from the cell walls.
Lamellae*
This character refers to whether there are fins of photosynthetic cells that arise from the leaf or not.
Lamellae present
In this state there are fins of photosynthetic cells that arise from the leaf. Sometimes these are thick and numerous covering most of the adaxial leaf surface making the leaf appear opaque and thick. Sometimes they are few and hard to spot and confined to a narrow costa.
Lamellae absent
In this state there are no fins of photosynthetic cells that arise from the leaf.
Cell wall sinuosity near base*
This character refers to whether the laminal cells near the leaf base have distinctly wavy cell walls or not.
Distinctly sinuose or nodulose
In this state the cell walls of the basal laminal cells are distinctly wavy with numerous undulations on each side.
Straight and evenly thickened
In this state the cell walls are straight or are curved without wave-like edges.
Plication*
This character refers to whether the leaf has folds in it or not.
Plicate
In this state the leaf has folds so that if the leaf is placed under a coverslip and viewed under a compound microscope the leaf does not flatten without leaving creases which appear as a darkened polygon. 
Not plicate
In this state the leaf has not clear folds.
Cell diameter in apical half*
This character refers to the average width of laminal cells taken at their widest point in the apical half of the leaf and is divided into four separate ranges.
Papillae form*
This character refers the form of the protruberances on the surfaces of laminal cells and comprises two states.
Simple, dome- or horn-shaped
In this state the papillae or mamillae are not branched. They can be dome- or horn-shaped or appear hollow.
Compound or crescent-shaped
In this state the papillae have branches or are shaped like a crescent.
Papillae location*
This character refers to whether there are papillae or mammillae on both surfaces of the leaf or not. This character is best assessed by placing a segment of stem with several leaves under a cover slip so that a side on view of parts of both surfaces will likely result which is the best way to visualise the papillae.
Adaxially and abaxially papillose
In this state both adaxial and abaxial surfaces have at least some distinct papillae. 
Abaxially papillose, adaxially smooth
In this state the papillae are confined to the abaxial surface.
Lamina cell layers*
This character refers to the thickness of the lamina throughout the leaf and comprises three states. The most accurate way to assess this character is to take cross-sections through the leaf to see how many cell layers thick the section is. Alternatively, often leaves with multistratose zones have lines or patches of darker cells when viewed under at ×100 magnification or higher which is caused by overlapping of cell layers in these darker regions.
Unistratose throughout apical half
In this state the leaf lamina is composed of only a single layer of cells throughout. Leaves in this category often do not have darker zones of cells which are often caused by multiple cell layers.
Bi- or multistratose throughout apical half
In this state all or most of the apical half of the leaf lamina is composed of more than one cell layer.
Bi- or multistratose at margins or in parts in apical half
In this state there are lines, patches or parts or all of the margins of the leaf lamina that are composed of more than one cell layer.
Seta
A set of three characters associated with the stalk that elevates the capsule.
Seta length
This character refers to the length of the stalk that elevates the capsule. Mature setae with mature capsules that are about to or have released their spores should be used. This character is divided into five length range states. This includes a gametophytic stalk (pseudopodium).
Position
This character refers to the position that the seta is borne on the leaf bearing parts (gametophyte).
Acrocarpous
In this state the seta is positioned at the end of a main stem which terminates the growth of that stem. Sometimes the stem may fork below the seta. Mosses that are acrocarpous tend to form rosettes, grow erect in tufts or are not or only sparsely branched.
Pleurocarpous or cladocarpous
In this state the sporophyte is positioned on the main stem or on short branches that come off the main stem or a longer main branch that continues to grow. Mosses that are pleurocarpous or cladocarpous often have prostrate stems, are long-creeping and branch freely and form mats rather than tufts.
Surface
This character refers to whether there are bumps, prickles or protuberances on the surface of the seta.
Seta smooth
In this state the edge of seta appears as a smooth uninterrupted straight line under the microscope.
Seta rough or papillose
In this state the edge of the seta has bumps, prickles or protuberances.
Capsule 
A set of seven characters that refer to the structure that contains the spores.
Capsule length
This character refers to the length of the capsule from the line of dehiscence in operculate capsules or from the apex in cleistogamous capsules to where the seta starts flaring out and is divided into five length range states. Mature capsules that are about to or have released their spores should be used. This length includes the apophysis (sterile neck region).
Emergence
This character refers to the degree that the capsule is elevated on a stalk beyond the leafy part of the moss (the gametophyte).
Clearly emergent from leaves 
In this state the capsule is elevated on a stalk well beyond the leaves when the capsule is mature and is ready to or has released its spores.
Immersed among leaves or slightly emergent
In this state the capsule always remains among the leaves or with part of the capsule raised slightly above the leaves. There is not a long seta clearly visible above the leaves. 
Capsule dehiscence
This character refers to how the capsule opens to release the spores within.
Indehiscent (cleistogamous)
In this state there is no clear signs that the capsule opens in a regular and predictable fashion, such as by slits or a cap near the end, to release the spores within.
Valvate
In this state the capsule opens by four slits on its sides. Once open the capsule resembles a lantern. This state is unique to Andreaea.
Operculate
In this state the capsule opens by a cap (operculum) positioned at the end opposite where it attaches to the stalk.
Inclination
This character refers to the angle that the structure that contains the spores (capsule) is oriented relative to the stalk.
Vertical
In this state the capsule forms a straight line with the stalk.
Inclined
In this state the cap at the end of the capsule (operculum) and underlying peristome teeth point in a direction that is an acute angle from a straight line formed by the stalk.
Horizontal
In this state the cap at the end of the capsule (operculum) and underlying peristome teeth point in a direction that is approximately a right angle to the stalk.
Pendent
In this state the cap at the end of the capsule (operculum) and underlying peristome teeth point toward the leafy part of the plant (gametophyte).
Curvature
This character refers to whether the capsule is curved at some point or is perfectly straight.
Curved, asymmetric
In this state the capsule is curved at some point so that one edge is longer (typically the upper) than the other.
Straight, symmetric
In this state the capsule is not bent or curved at all at any point.
Shape
This character refers to the shape of the capsule, not including the cap (operculum) that often seals it at the apex in operculate species.
Globose
In this state the capsule is roughly spherical.
Cylindric
In this state the capsule is much longer than wide and resembles a cigar.
Ovoid
In this state the capsule is widest near its base.
Ellipsoid or obloid
In this state the capsule is widest near its middle and is oval-shaped or like a squat rectangle when viewed from the side.
Obconical or obovoid
In this state the capsule is widest near the cap (operculum). 
Apophysis length
This character refers to the length of a sterile neck (apophysis) relative to the spore containing portion of the capsule (urn). The apophysis often has a different surface texture and colour to the urn.
At least half the length of urn
In this state the apophysis is at least half the length of the urn.
Less than half length of urn
In this state the apophysis is less than half the length of the urn.
Operculum 
A set of two characters that refer to the cap that seals the spores in a capsule.
Length
This character refers to the length from the apex of the operculum to where it comes off the capsule and is divided into six length range states.
Shape
This character refers to the shape of the operculum and comprises four states.
Conical 
In this state the operculum is cone-shaped.
Rostrate
In this state the operculum becomes abruptly pointed towards its centre, making the operculum appear like a bird’s face with the point being the beak. Many species can have a rostrate calyptra that sits over the operculum before the calyptra falls off. This is not part of the operculum and so species with a rostrate calyptra and an operculum that is not rostrate should not be considered to have a rostrate operculum. 
Hemispherical
In this state the operculum is shaped like a hemisphere and does not come to a point.
Flat, sometimes with an apiculus
In this state the operculum is more or less level with the rim of the urn (the part of the capsule containing the spores). Sometimes flat opercula can have a small point (apiculus) at their centre.  
Peristome 
A set of six characters that refer to the teeth that are often present at the opening of the capsule. These characters should only be used for samples where the opercula have fallen off. Removing opercula before they are naturally shed is likely to damage the underlying peristome which will likely result in misinterpretation of the peristome.
Type
This character refers to the number, arrangement and form of the segments or teeth that are at the opening of a capsule. 
Peristome absent
In this state there are no peristome segments (teeth or hairs).
Brush-like
In this state the peristome consists of a series of white filaments that look like an artist’s brush. This state is unique to Dawsonia.
Single series of 8 teeth
In this state the peristome consists of eight teeth in a single ring.
Single series of 16 teeth
In this state the peristome consists of 16 teeth in a single ring that are entire or only shallowly divided near the apex. 
Single series of 32 teeth
In this state the peristome consists of 32 teeth in a single ring or a single ring of 16 teeth that are divided to at least half way along their length which gives the impression of 32 teeth.
Single series of 64 teeth
In this state the peristome consists of 64 teeth in a single ring.
Double series of teeth (diplolepidous)
In this state the peristome consists of two rings of teeth, one ring in front of the other.
Torsion
This character refers to whether the peristome segments forming a spirally cylinder or not.
Forming a spiraling bundle
In this state the peristome segments spiral and adhere close together to form a bundle or cylinder.
Not forming a spiraling bundle
In this state a spiraling bundle is not formed. Instead, the teeth are straight or if the are curved they don’t tightly spiral around each other multiple times to form a spiraling bundle.
Number of exostome segments
This character refers to the number of teeth in the outer ring in species that have two series of peristome teeth. Consequently, this character only applies to species that have a double series of teeth. 
Number of exostome segments
This character refers to the number of teeth or segments in the outer ring in species that have two series of peristome teeth. Consequently, this character only applies to species that have a double series of teeth. It comprises two states.
Number of endostome segments
This character refers to the number of teeth or segments in the inner ring in species that have two series of peristome teeth. Consequently, this character only applies to species that have a double series of teeth. It comprises three states.
Epiphragm
This character refers to whether there is a membrane attached to the apices of the peristome teeth that partially covers the opening of the capsule or not.
Epiphragm present
In this state there is a membrane attached to the apices of the peristome teeth that partially covers the opening of the capsule. 
Epiphragm absent
In this state the peristome is not attached to a membrane.
Cilia presence
This character refers to whether there are appendages that alternate with the inner peristome (endostome) ring segments or not.
Present and well developed
In this state there are well developed appendages between the endostome segments.
Absent or rudimentary
In this state there are no appendages or the appendages are not well formed between the endostome segments.
Diplolepidous peristome type
This character refers to how the teeth in the outer series are positioned relative to the inner series of teeth in species with two series of peristome teeth.
Opposite
In this state the inner series of teeth are positioned directly below the teeth of the outer series so that they are behind the outer series when looking down. This state is unique to the Funariaceae.
Alternate
In this state the inner series of teeth alternate with the outer series of teeth so that when viewed from above the inner series of teeth appear between the outer series of teeth. 
Calyptra
A set of two characters that refer to a structure that often adheres to the outside of the capsule, especially when the capsule is young, that is derived from archegonia (egg producing organ on the gametophyte). 
Hairiness
This character refers to whether the calyptra has hairs or teeth, or not.
Glabrous and without teeth
In this state the calyptra has no hairs or teeth.
Hairy or with prominent teeth
In this state the calyptra has hairs or prominent teeth. The hairs can be sparse or form a tomentum over the calyptra.
Dehiscence
This character refers to how calyptra initially is positioned on the capsule before it is shed.
Mitrate or remaining entire and intact
In this state the calyptra splits evenly on all sides or does not split and sits like a cone over the apex of the capsule and operculum, or completely envelops the capsule. 
Cucullate
In this state the calyptra splits along one side so that the calyptra covers one side (typically the upper side) of the capsule with the other side (typically the lower side) of the capsule revealed between the split that extends to near the apex of the capsule and operculum. 
Occurrence
Two characters that refer to where a moss can be found.
Substrate
This character refers to what the moss grows on.
Soil
In this state species grow on the surface of soil.
Calcareous rocks, beside concrete or mortar
In this state species grow on rocks with high calcium content such as limestone or concrete or the mortar between bricks. Calcareous rocks naturally occur in Victoria predominantly along the coast, in the Glenelg River region, and around Buchan and Limestone Creek in East Victoria.
Non-calcareous rocks
In this state species grow on rocks that do not have a high calcium content, including basalt, granite, sandstone or mudstone.
Trees, shrubs and logs
In this state species are epiphytic growing on some part of a tree or other plant, such as the trunk or branches, and these plant parts may be standing or have fallen. Some species with long-creeping stems may have originated as epiphytes but have fallen to the ground and continued to grow over the forest floor, which gives the impression that these species would fall within the soil state for this character. Most species where this situation is likely to arise are considered in this key to be both epiphytic and terrestrial. However, to minimize the chances of misidentification, if a species can be seen to grow epiphytically as well as terrestrially, this state should be chosen. 
Submerged or partially submerged in ponds or streams
Species that are largely aquatic fall within this state. Some species that would more typically fall into this state may also occur beside but above the level of the water and may also satisfy one of the other states.
Dung or animal remains
Only one Victoria species of moss typically grows on dung or dead animal remains. This is Tayloria octoblepharum.
Natural Region
Victoria has been divided into 16 natural regions. For this character the user determines which natural region the plant that is to be identified was found in to enter for this character. The distributions of many moss species are poorly known due to a paucity of records. To overcome this limitation natural regions where species have not been recorded in but are likely to occur in because they offer similar habitat and are close to regions of known occurrence are for this key also considered to harbor these species.
Murray Mallee
Lowan Mallee
Wimmera
Wannon
Grampians
Riverina
Midlands
Victorian Volcanic Plain
Otway Plain
Otway Ranges
Eastern Highlands
Gippsland Plain
Gippsland Highlands
Wilsons Promontory
Snowfields
East Gippsland
Reproduction
A set of two characters that refer to aspects of reproduction.
Specialised asexual propagule type
This character refers to the structures a species produces to reproduce asexually.
Leaf surface gemmae
In this state the leaf surface (usually the face facing the stem apex) has a cluster of green discs-like propagules (gemmae).
Stem apex or leaf axil gemmae
In this state the ends of branches or the angle created between the leaf and the stem have small few-celled gemmae.
Apical leaf tufts, leaf-like gemmae or leaf fragments
In this state the end of the stem and its leaves, individual leaves or fragments of leaves can detach when disturbed to form new plants.
Rhizoidal tubers or gemmae
In this state minute spherical structures are produced on rhizoids that anchor the plant to the substrate.
Filamentous stem propagule
In this state red-brown filaments are produced in the upper stem that detach to form propagules.
Asexual propagules absent
In this state there are no discernable asexual propagules. Almost all species can be classified in this state as often species that can produce asexual propagules do not always produce these propagules, with propagule formation stimulated by some environmental cue.
Plant sexuality
This character refers to whether both male organs (antheridia) that produce sperm and female organs (archegonia) that produce eggs are positioned on the same or different plants (gametophytes). To assess this character the archegonia and antheridia will need to be located. Archegonia under a compound microscope tend to be spindle shaped with the egg in the widest part whereas antheridia are more oval or sausage shaped.
Antheridia and Archegonia on same plant
In this state both male organs (antheridia) that produce sperm and female organs (archegonia) that produce eggs are positioned on the same plant, either close together (synoicous) or on separate branches (monoicous). Either this state or the other state can be chosen for pseudoautoicous or phyllodiocous species that produce minute male plants on larger female plants. Species that fall in this state often freely produce sporophytes because the chances of the sperm reaching an egg are more likely when both are in close proximity.
Antheridia and Archegonia on separate plants
In this state antheridia and archegonia are positioned on different plants (dioicous). Either this state or the other state can be chosen for pseudoautoicous or phyllodiocous species that produce minute male plants on larger female plants. Species that fall in this state often do not produce sporophytes because the chances of the sperm reaching an egg are less likely when they are separated by being on separate plants.
